Welcome, everybody.
This is the Blocks and
Grand Central Dispatch in Practice talk.
I'm Dave Zarzycki and I'm
from Developer Technologies.
So where are we?
We're talking about
Grand Central Dispatch and blocks,
and these are very low-level
technologies that are available in
Mac OS X and iOS for implementing
a wide variety of services.
Everything on the system uses it,
all the way from lib system,
from very traditional Unix APIs up to
UIKit and applications and foundation.
So what are we going to talk about?
Well, there's two major or
three major sections.
First, we're going to do an introduction,
talk about blocks,
Grand Central Dispatch,
and then the latter half of, well,
once you start using these technologies,
what are the subtle things you
need to be aware of that can impact
your design or maybe surprise you
or surprise you in great ways?
So that will involve what blocks automate
and what blocks don't automate as far
as memory management is concerned.
So blocks, what are blocks?
Blocks simplify function callbacks.
They allow you to...
and I will talk about the
functions of blocks and GCD.
We have a function, a body of code.
We have our curlies,
we have some statements inside.
Well, guess what?
We have blocks.
They have bodies of code.
They have the same curlies.
They have the same
statements you already know.
Now here's where things start to diverge.
You obviously know pointers in C.
Well, with blocks,
we have a special kind of pointer,
and it uses the caret.
And as you can see,
we can declare a pointer to
a function and a pointer to a
block with these characters.
In fact, this is the only difference
between these two pointers.
One uses a star, one uses the caret.
Now, of course,
you all are good programmers and you
would never just type that out in random
places in your code and use typedefs.
The typedefs look the same.
They're the same syntax, same style.
And in fact, after that point,
functions and blocks look the same.
They have a type.
You can assign to them.
And in fact, you can call them the same.
So let's go back to these blocks of code.
Let's make some room.
We're going to add some arguments.
And in fact, the arguments are the same.
You declare them the same,
they use parentheses,
you have a comma separated list, int A,
int B.
Well, let's see where they
start to diverge now.
Well, with a function,
we need to name it.
So here's my comparison function.
And it needs a return value,
so we're going to say end.
What are we going to do for a block?
Do you remember that special
character we talked about,
the carrot?
There, that's it.
One character.
And if you missed that,
let's highlight it.
That's it.
Just one little character.
There it is, hiding there.
But it's a huge character,
and it makes a big difference,
as we're about to see.
So let's talk about implementing
a sort function with the little
comparison routine we just implemented.
With a function, we would, of course,
take some kind of pointer
to an array of integers,
maybe a size of the integer array,
and then we'll take our function
callback to compare them and let
the sort routine do its magic.
With blocks, it's the same.
We're going to have our pointer
to the array of integers,
maybe the size of it, and our block.
Okay.
Everything's similar.
We know this.
Well, how are we going to use it?
Well, with a function,
we're going to take our array,
pass up the size of it,
and then we're going to use that
name we declared for function,
my compare,
and pass it to the sort array.
Well, what do we do for blocks?
Here's where the power kicks in.
We're going to actually just
take that body of code and put
it right in our sort function.
This keeps the usage close
to the definition and usage
right in the same spot.
There's no ambiguity.
It's very clear.
It's right when you're
thinking about it anyway.
And in fact, that body of code for
the block disappears.
They all stay together.
Okay.
So this is a basic block.
All right, that's cool.
We understand they're the same,
but one might not see this as
really saving a lot of time.
So let's build on this and
talk about trivial blocks
versus non-trivial functions,
or let's implement a configurable sort.
So starting again with our
function and block comparison,
we have our sort as we just implemented,
taking a block, and we can add maybe some
kind of reverse argument.
We want to do a reverse sort.
Well, here we go.
That's it.
The reverse argument is in scope
in our function when we are calling
sort and the block is in scope when
we declare it and pass it to sort.
And because of that,
we can just use the reverse variable or
any other variable we want inside of that
block because everything is in scope.
: Well, let's see what we'd have
to do for functions now.
All right.
So here we're starting
from a very similar point.
We have our reverse argument,
we have our sort, but we have a problem.
That comparison function
is defined somewhere else.
We need to get that data to it somehow.
But how?
Well, we need to pack that reverse
argument in a data structure.
And then we're going to have
to change our sort routine.
All of a sudden, we have to change APIs.
We have to go then deal with the
ripple effect of everybody that
uses sort and now pass in this data.
And in fact, we now take the address of
that data and pass it in.
So you can see the address of D there,
and the complexity is just beginning.
Now we need to move the code down.
Well, not literally,
but somewhere else in our code.
We need to actually go back and
declare that data structure.
We need to add whatever arguments we
want to pass in to the sort routine.
We then need to go to
our cert routine again,
make a lot of room.
Add a context parameter,
and because this is C, of course,
it's a void star.
It's generic.
We now need to cast it
back to that data type.
And then we finally use it,
but it's abstracted away
through pointer indirection,
and we have a lot more code.
And worst of all, as the slash, slash,
slash shows, that code is far away from
the actual implementation.
We've had to deal with the mental
overhead of code over here,
code over there.
It's just starting to get messy.
So that's it.
These are basic blocks,
basic non-trivial blocks,
but you can see that we're already
starting to save a lot of code and
a lot of mental overhead of basic
boilerplate of C data structures
and pointer and direction.
Let's move on.
Let's even build on this.
Let's build an even more non-trivial
block and let's extract results from it.
Well, here we are with the code
that we just left off with.
We're going to make a little bit
of room in the block and just to
declare another variable in the stack,
a count.
Let's say we're going to count the number
of comparisons we made because we're
trying to do some performance analysis.
Well, here we are.
We just declare int count,
initialize it to zero on the stack.
and David Koehn.
We are going to start
with the first step,
which is to say count++ in our code
and then at the end we can log it and
see how our sort routine is performing.
That's almost true and that's why we
left a little bit of space in front
of that declaration of the count.
We need one more thing,
under under block.
This keyword is the only
keyword you need to know to
get information out of a block.
And we'll talk more about why this is
the case at the end of the talk when we
talk about memory management and blocks.
But that's it.
Three simple lines,
one of which is just logging.
And we've gotten data out of a block.
That simple.
Let's look at what we'd
have to do with functions.
You're not actually meant to read this,
because what ends up happening
is we're adding yet more code,
and yet more code in lots of
different places in our file.
We're gonna have to, and in fact,
this is what that code looks like.
Again, I don't expect you to read this,
but I'll just tell you what's going on.
We had to go back to that data structure.
We had to declare that, you know,
our out parameter.
We had to then go to where we needed
the sort and then assign the result
into our temporary stack variable
that we're going to pass to sort.
And then finally, in our sort routine,
we now need to deal with the pointer
indirection and making sure that we
actually save off the result and the data
structure so that way after sort returns,
we can get at the result and it wasn't
left behind in the sort routine function.
So yeah, this gets really complicated.
And as you can see,
it's a lot simpler with blocks.
And in fact,
it can get even more complicated
with functions when we start
dealing with asynchronous code,
but we'll deal with that when we talk
about GCD and at the end of the talk
when we deal with memory management.
So in comparison, the mental overhead of
blocks versus functions,
we've highlighted on the right.
You just need to know that caret,
it may even be hard to see,
but it's there, that one character,
and then under under block.
That's all the mental overhead you need.
But for functions, we have a lot.
We have data structure definitions,
we have pointer indirection,
we have code far away from usage.
It's a big mess.
So let's talk about blocks at Apple.
We love them.
And a lot of APIs use them.
Some common patterns you'll see
are things like enumeration.
And I'd like to use these two
examples enumerating a dictionary
and an array of why we like them.
With the Objective-C for each syntax,
you can only do one value at a time,
one thing.
But in the case of a dictionary,
we can iterate both the key and
the value at the same time because
that's how we can define our block.
And in fact, that's what the enumeration
of a dictionary does here.
and David We can do that
for any containing object.
Much more is available in the system.
We have GCD, which we'll talk about.
We have lots of callbacks.
And in fact, callbacks are one of the
simplest and most common
patterns and they look like this.
Well, almost.
That wouldn't be great if we're not going
to pass any arguments with the block.
We could just delete them.
In fact, that caret becomes the only
character you need to define a block.
You're going to have to use the curlies
anyway with functions or blocks,
but the caret is the only overhead
you need to do a callback.
And with that,
I would like to transition to Kevin to
talk about Grand Central Dispatch
and its use of these blocks and
doing really powerful patterns.
Good morning.
My name is Kevin Van Vechten.
I'm with the CoreOS team at Apple.
So today we're going to talk
about Grand Central Dispatch,
which builds upon the idea of blocks.
And as Dave just outlined,
you saw how blocks are really great in
terms of C syntax and eliminating a lot
of the conceptual overhead for defining
blocks of code that can be called by the
system as an iterator or as a callback.
Well, we built on that further and we
created Grand Central Dispatch,
which really treats blocks
as fundamental objects.
And like any objects, you can put them in
interesting data structures.
The fundamental data structure
of Dispatch is a queue,
and we'll talk about how we use
these queues to efficiently provide
you with tools for serialization
in your multi-threaded code,
for concurrency,
and for asynchronous execution.
So you're probably familiar
with the concept of queues from,
you know,
common computer science literature.
They're pretty straightforward things,
simple linked list.
In this case,
it's a linked list of blocks.
Now,
the queues that we implement in GCD have
some very important characteristics.
The first of those is that
the queues are strictly FIFO.
So anytime you enqueue a block,
that's always going to go
on to the tail of the queue,
and anytime a block is dequeued,
that's going to come off
of the head of the queue.
And we've taken it a step further
and we've provided synchronization
primitives that guarantee that
the end queue is always atomic.
So you can have any number of threads
in your application and all of those
threads can be enqueuing blocks onto
the same queue and will automatically
sort it all out and make sure that
the blocks get enqueued in FIFO order
and ultimately get run in FIFO order.
So because it's safe to use these
queues for multiple threads,
the queues themselves become
a synchronization primitive.
And finally, we take these queues and we
actually manage the dequeuing of
blocks and the execution of them
automatically by the runtime.
As you saw with the block that
Dave showed where there were no arguments
and no return result from the block,
it was just a very simple callback.
That means that all of the blocks
conform to the same signature,
and we know exactly how to call them.
They just need to be invoked.
They don't need to be
passed any arguments.
They don't have any return results.
All of that is managed by what
variables were captured in scope
when the block was declared.
And so we can automatically dequeue
these things in the background on
threads that the system manages for you.
So some interesting characteristics of
this approach become apparent when we
compare the queues to traditional locks
like spin locks or Pthread mutexes.
So in real rough terms,
a mutex or a spin lock is most
efficient when there's no contention.
In other words,
if there's only one thread
running in your application
and it acquires the lock,
then it can start executing
the code right away.
Any other threads that try to
acquire the lock at the same time
are going to be stalled and they
aren't going to be able to make any
progress until that lock is released.
So really the efficiency in terms
of throughput of your multithreaded
code is going to decrease linearly
about with the number of threads you
have and the amount of contention.
On the other hand, with queues,
because we can do a very quick atomic
operation to enqueue a block on a
queue and then move on in your code,
we actually have a much different curve.
And that is that peak efficiency
in terms of throughput is actually
achieved when the system is the busiest.
The more queues you have,
the more blocks you're
submitting to those queues,
the faster they return,
the more throughput you're going to get.
And this is a really interesting
thing to consider when you're
designing applications that run
across a very wide range of hardware.
So you might be designing iOS apps
that run on iPhones and iPod Touches,
and those only have a single core.
and David Koehn.
The characteristics were pretty good,
but if we take that same
code and run it on an iPad 2,
which has two cores,
you're going to start seeing
some benefits from the
approach of using queues.
And of course,
all of these interfaces are
available on the Mac as well,
and so you might have many
cores on your Macintosh,
and the same coding style,
the same approach,
literally the same binary can run
from one core to many cores very well.
When the system automatically dequeues,
what it does is it's guaranteeing
that strict FIFO ordering of
the blocks being dequeued,
but if there are multiple
queues that are independent,
that actually presents the system
with an opportunity for concurrency.
So in this example,
we have a couple of queues.
One has three blocks.
The other has two blocks.
The system might begin
dequeuing some of these blocks
and executing them on one CPU.
If another CPU becomes
available to execute the blocks,
then that second queue can
start and you can see there's
some overlap in the timeline.
That's concurrency that was
available to your application.
So in order to use Dispatch,
we're going to talk about
four fundamental concepts.
The queue, which is a data structure,
and then there are three functions, sync,
apply, and async.
And we'll go into each
of these in detail.
So starting off with queues,
they're a pretty standard data structure.
You're probably familiar with
the semantics from a lot of
other APIs on the system.
When you call dispatch queue create,
it returns to you a new queue object.
These objects are retained and released.
You should retain and release in pairs.
The last release balances
out with the original create,
and that actually deallocates the object.
You can see in the create
function here that there's a name.
We recommend giving a
reverse DNS style name.
These names actually show up
in things like crash reports,
so it can be pretty useful
as a diagnostic tool to give
descriptive names to your queues.
So you can see what was executing
at the time something went
wrong in your application.
The second parameter,
which is null in this example,
has advanced attributes that
you can assign to queues.
We won't talk about any of those today.
So moving on to Dispatch Sync.
Dispatch Sync is probably
the simplest API call in GCD.
And basically all it does
is it takes two arguments,
the first being a queue and
the second being a block.
And DispatchSync synchronously enqueues
the block onto the queue and that's
done in an atomic nature so it's safe
to call DispatchSync on the same queue
from multiple threads at the same time.
The blocks will be serialized,
they'll be executed by the
system and then after the
block has finished executing,
DispatchSync will return to the
call site in your application.
So this is a very useful thing for
implementing critical sections.
Maybe you have a lot of threads,
you're implementing some
shared data structure,
you can use a queue to
protect that data structure,
you can use Dispatch Sync to serialize
access to that data structure.
And so in this code example,
we're doing something, you know,
classic textbook example of having
some sort of account balance that's
updated with the transaction,
and we want to make sure that
there's atomicity in this update.
So pretty straightforward stuff.
A slightly more advanced pattern
building on Dispatch Sync is using
the under under block keyword to
extract results back out of the
block that's synchronously executed.
So we've expanded this
example a little bit.
There's a return value.
We're just going to have a Boolean
that says whether or not the update
happened successfully because maybe
we want to check to make sure the
balance in the account is actually
sufficient that we can adjust it
for the amount of the transaction.
Now, one of the key things that differs
here between Dispatch Sync and a
traditional locking approach is
highlighted by the return statement
that's about halfway through the code.
If you've ever written a very
complicated function with a lot
of locking that checks various
error conditions or checks input,
you know you have to be very
careful to unlock any of the
locks that you've acquired before
returning from your function.
If you ever leave a lock locked,
then a lot of times somewhere
much later in your code,
something deadlocks against
that because the logic was
left in an inconsistent state.
One of the really powerful things about
blocks in Dispatch Sync is that the
runtime manages all the serialization.
And it does that on block boundaries.
It's safe for you to return from
your block at any point because it's
the returning from the block that
signals that that block is finished
and the next block can execute.
So it really lets you do some
concise things for checking for
error conditions and whatnot,
simply returning from
the block in the middle.
You don't have to worry about
unlocking a lot of locks before
continuing execution of your program.
And then, of course, in this example,
assuming the transaction was
able to return from the block,
you can do that.
to be interpreted,
we didn't return early,
then we just assigned true to the result,
and that'll be visible by the caller
when we return from DispatchSync,
and that can be returned
from the outside function.
So there's one thing you probably
should be aware of with Dispatch Sync,
and that is it does what it says.
It waits until the block has finished.
So if you were to do something like
this and call Dispatch Sync on the
same queue from within a block that's
also Dispatch Synced to that queue,
you're going to deadlock.
And the reason for that is the
outer block is still executing.
It hasn't returned.
The runtime enforces very strict
FIFO serialized nature on these queues,
like I mentioned earlier.
So that inner block is really never going
to get an opportunity to execute because
it's still waiting for the outer block,
which of course is waiting
for the inner block.
Now,
this example is pretty straightforward.
If you saw this in code,
you'd probably say, well, yeah,
of course that's going to happen.
Though if there's a lot
of layers of indirection,
then sometimes it's less obvious
that this might be occurring.
So the takeaway point here is if you're
debugging and you see things that are
kind of hanging up and you look at your
backtrace and there are multiple calls
to Dispatch Sync in that backtrace,
you probably want to go and look and see,
oh, are these in fact the same queue?
Might this be a pretty classic
deadlock pattern there?
So that's Dispatch Sync.
Now we'll move on to Dispatch Apply,
which really takes the exact same
approach that Dispatch Sync does,
but provides concurrency
to your application.
And this is very useful
for data level parallelism.
The runtime is able to scale the
blocks that run concurrently to the
number of cores that are available.
And it really takes a pattern
very similar to a traditional for
loop that you're used to using.
You give it an overall count.
It's going to provide an
index parameter to the block.
It's going to be incrementing
that index as it runs.
You can use that index
to index into an array,
something along those lines.
Now, Dispatch Apply is also beneficial
in that it has knowledge of
what various different parts
of your application are doing.
So you might imagine calling
into one framework that
has made the decision that,
oh, well,
we have eight cores on this machine.
We're going to divide this image
up into pieces and execute eight
threads to process that image.
And meanwhile,
you might be playing a sound or something
and the different framework has said,
oh, we have eight cores on the machine.
We can split the sound up and process it.
And this is a very useful
tool for data analysis.
With eight concurrent threads.
And pretty soon you're
running 16 threads,
but you only have eight cores and
you aren't really gaining anything.
Dispatch Apply is able to balance
the competing demands from different
areas of your application because
it actually has visibility into what
these different subsystems are doing.
The subsystems themselves can
partition things in a logical manner
and not really have to worry about
how busy the system is at that moment.
So as you see in this simple example,
we're just using the index
to index into an input array.
We perform some computation.
We write into some output array.
And we're done.
And what this looks like in practice is
we might have a block and we have a CPU.
We start executing some
blocks on that CPU.
Another one becomes available.
The system just automatically fans
out the blocks to the multiple CPUs.
That can grow and contract over time
depending on what the system looks like.
So one thing that we get a
lot of questions about is why
isn't Dispatch Apply working
as fast as I think it should?
You know, I have an eight-core machine,
I did a Dispatch Apply,
and I'm maybe seeing a one-and-a-half
times speedup instead of close
to an eight-times speedup.
Well, there's a few reasons for that.
One of the most common
is actually hidden locks.
You might have a fairly complicated
body of code in this block that
you're using with Dispatch Apply,
and on the other side of some
function call that you make,
perhaps there's a lock.
In this example,
we're just calling printf
and printing out the index.
And if you were to try this example,
you would see that it actually
executes at about one-time speed,
even on a multi-core machine.
Well, the reason for that is because
the standard C library actually
has a lock inside printf,
and so it doesn't really matter how many
threads are running these apply blocks.
They're all going to be executing
one after another because it's
all contending for that lock.
outside printf.
So when you're profiling your code,
this is definitely
something to be aware of.
Look for those bottlenecks if you
aren't seeing the performance you
would expect from Dispatch Apply.
Another somewhat related issue is
perhaps the block you're providing
to Dispatch Apply is too small,
and so the cost of the overhead
of actually bringing up these
threads and fanning out the work
is dominating the execution,
and so you don't really see much
benefit from doing a concurrent apply.
Or, another possibility is perhaps
you're accessing memory that's
too close together and you're
constantly invalidating the cache
line between cores because they're
both contending at a hardware
level for the same memory accesses.
Well,
striding is an approach that you can
use to mitigate both of these issues.
Basically,
the concept of striding is take
the input and divide it up into
chunks and then perform the apply
block on just each individual chunk
instead of each individual element.
Sometimes it's easy to divide
things into chunks logically,
like you might have an
image and you might decide,
okay, well,
we're actually going to apply over
all of the rows of the image and
then iterate linearly through each
of the columns within those rows.
Sometimes it's a bit more arbitrary
and it really is just chunking
an array in a specific size.
There's not really a good rule of
thumb for what the right sizes are,
but typically it's pretty easy
to come up with a pattern like
the one on the slide where,
you know, you're jumping to a major index
in an array and then iterating
over a subindex and you can use
performance tools to tune your code,
look for something that looks
fairly optimal as kind of a stride,
you know, a chunk size.
And one of the things you can also
do is make sure that the chunk
sizes are big enough that if you are
dealing with an array that you would
actually be operating on cache line
boundaries so that you don't give,
you know,
something that's within the same
cache line to the same array.
So you can't have the same
block on multiple CPUs,
but they can operate on disjoint
sections of data that will
keep the contention lower.
Cache line size is something
that you can look up.
There's sysctl calls and whatnot
for obtaining the cache line size
value for the current machine.
So it's really just
an iterative approach,
measure and tune,
but this can make a huge difference
in the performance that you
get out of dispatch apply.
So the last major fundamental building
block of GCD is Dispatch Async.
And Dispatch Async is a bit
unlike the others in that it
executes blocks asynchronously.
It doesn't wait for them to
complete before returning.
So this is also useful for implementing
critical sections because remember
the queues and the dequeue of the
queues is what maintains the strict
FIFO ordering and mutual exclusion.
But in this case,
because we're calling dispatch
async instead of dispatch sync,
we're saying we're willing
to just enqueue the block,
fire and forget, return immediately.
We know the system will execute
that at some later time.
So sometimes you know you need
to perform some operation,
you know it needs to be consistent
with respect to whatever data
is also protected by that queue,
but you're not actually interested
in the result of that operation.
And Dispatch Async is a great
tool to use in those cases.
So here we've expanded on the example
that we were using previously,
and we can use Dispatch Async to
perform some maintenance task,
like maybe we calculate some sort of
interest that accumulates in the account.
We don't really need to
know what that was here,
so we can just enqueue the block,
fire and forget, move on.
This is even more powerful when you
apply it to the overall architecture
of your application and move
work off of the main thread.
So the main thread on
both Mac OS and iOS,
is what's responsible
for handling events.
It is running the main event loop,
events are processed there.
Any code that's executing for a long
period of time on the main thread
prevents your application from receiving
and processing additional events.
And so on an iOS app,
this makes it look like the app's
not responding to touch events.
On a Mac OS app,
you actually see the cursor change
into this spinning beach ball if
it's in the state long enough.
So anytime you have a large task,
you might want to consider using
Dispatch Async to defer the execution
of that task off of the main thread.
And of course,
anytime you defer something on a queue,
and you have multiple queues,
that gives the system the opportunity
to execute those blocks concurrently.
So you actually implicitly get multi-core
benefits on machines that support that.
So building on this
pattern of Dispatch Async,
one of the most useful features is
embedding multiple layers of Dispatch
Async within one single block.
So you can actually do
that by using the command
"dispatch_async_dispatch_async" to get
the result back to the main thread.
And using that to first take a
block and defer its execution
off of the main thread.
And then once you have a
result from that block,
using Dispatch Async to get the
result back to the main thread,
so that you can actually use that data
to perform some sort of UI update.
So here we have an example where, again,
we probably want to execute
with consistency of the
account information we had,
but we're going to call some function
that renders an account statement.
Maybe it returns an image that
can be drawn to the screen.
That might take a while.
We don't want to do
that on the main thread.
But once we have the
information available,
we can do a subsequent Dispatch Async.
We can call a special function
called Dispatch Get Main Queue,
and that's tied in with the main
event loop of your application.
We'll make sure that blocks submitted to
the main Dispatch Queue get executed as
you would expect on the main event loop.
And then you can perform the draw
operation of the image on the
main thread where it belongs,
but you didn't have to wait
for a long time in order to
gather the raw data before that.
So if you're going to be doing this
type of nested Dispatch Call Something,
Have It Call Back,
a lot of times it makes sense to
actually define a function that
encapsulates that pattern in the API.
And so what we really recommend,
as you see in the top line of code here,
is providing the queue and
the callback block as the last
two arguments of the function.
The queue provides the execution context
for where that block should be invoked,
and the callback block is a
function that's going to be
used to call back the function.
And then the callback block is,
of course,
whatever you're expecting to run after
the asynchronous operation has completed.
So those are the last two parameters.
The reason for putting the
block at the end is that,
as you saw in the earlier examples,
it's very convenient to define a
block in line with the function call.
Keeping it at the end is
a syntactic convenience.
It means that you don't have to go
looking for extra parameters that
might be dangling past a very large
block that's there in the declaration.
So we get a queue, we get a block,
we call this new asynchronous
function we've defined,
and we pass in the queue.
In this case, like the previous example,
we want it to be executed
on the main queue.
And then now we just define a simple
image draw block that executes there.
So one thing you do need to be
aware of is that dispatch queues
must be retained when you're
using this nested block approach.
So this example is really what
the implementation of that
asynchronous function we defined on
the previous slide might look like.
And because we're being passed a
queue that we don't have ownership of,
and because all we're really doing in
this function is calling dispatch async,
which returns immediately,
the caller is free to release that
queue as soon as it's passed it to us,
which means that queue might be
invalid by the time the block
actually gets around to running.
Because remember,
dispatch async is fire and forget.
It's deferred execution.
Some other thread will run
that at some later time.
So we need to make sure the
lifetime of the queue is extended.
Such that we know it's valid so that
it can receive the last callback block.
So here we have a queue input parameter.
Before we do the dispatch async,
we need to do a dispatch retain.
And the dispatch retain means
that we're asserting some degree
of ownership of this queue.
Then inside our background task block,
we can deliver the callback block
to that queue via dispatch async.
And once we've done that,
we're done with the queue.
The system will take it from
there so we can actually release
our ownership of the queue.
So this retain release pattern,
where you retain things before
an async block and then release
them in the async block,
is necessary when you have a
couple layers of indirection
like this and you're working with
types that are basic C types,
you know, C malloced objects,
you need malloc and free,
duplicate strings,
retain or release queues,
that type of thing.
And so to talk a little bit
more about some of these memory
management rules surrounding
blocks and asynchronous execution,
I'd like to invite
Dave back up to the stage.
All right.
Thanks, Kevin.
So now we're going to
really start to talk about,
we're going to talk about the
practical details of blocks and async.
This is where the memory
management kicks in.
This is where a lot of your kind of
daily details about how do I make
everything work right and work reliably.
So building on what Kevin talked about,
let's take dispatch async.
And implement it.
We're going to implement it right here,
right now.
Well, we have that block parameter.
What are we going to do?
Well, in fact,
GCD provides an alternative
function-based interface.
They're the same names with
an underbar F at the end.
It takes a context parameter and a
classic C style and it takes a function.
And that function takes
that context parameter.
All right.
Well, here's the body of dispatch async.
It just calls the underbar
F version of the same.
It passes the same API.
Passes the same queue.
And then it does two interesting things.
It calls block copy,
which is a block API.
And what that does is that
copies the block to the heap.
And we'll see why in a second.
And then it calls this
little static helper routine.
What is that?
Well, that's just this.
It takes that context parameter,
casts it back to a block,
calls the block, and then releases it.
That's it.
That's how you -- and the important
thing to take away with this
is that it's not just a block.
It's a block.
that any async API should
block copy and block release.
This ensures that a lot of automatic
memory management kicks in and it saves
you a lot of boilerplate in your code of
taking that data structure that we talked
about at the beginning of the talk,
copying it to the heap,
figuring out when to free it.
This is what blocks really is all about.
So the really important takeaway, too,
is let's say there's an API in
the system or an API in your code.
Well, guess what?
You can add a block wrapper to it.
It's that simple.
And in fact, you don't even need to
wait for Apple to do it.
You can just write your own little
block wrapper around any function
and context pointer-based API.
So what is this block copy?
What does block copy do?
It does a lot of great things.
It automatically copies values, integers,
floats, pointers, et cetera,
and that under under block
variable forces sharing.
This is what allows the caller
and the block to share data.
But otherwise, that copy,
that automatic copy of values
is what allows things like
Dispatch Async to just work.
Any values that are captured
are automatically brought
to the heap with the block.
Block copy also automatically
copies and releases other blocks.
So if you just happen to use a block
parameter within another block,
you don't need to worry
about memory managing the
relationship between the two.
and David Koeppel.
It automatically releases
Objective C objects.
If you may have noticed this week,
this is a big theme of the conference,
where we're automatically retaining
and releasing Objective C objects.
And blocks are one example of how this
pattern has been increasingly apparent
and obvious in hindsight at Apple.
We need to automatically retain
and release objects because
it's just the right thing to do.
and David Koeppel.
Block copy also automatically calls
C++ constructors and destructors.
Having said that,
strongly recommend that you
use our latest compiler,
the Apple LLVM 3.0 compiler to get
the best C++ and block relationship.
All right, let's talk about what
block copy doesn't do.
And this is really why
certainly some of you are here.
Block copy doesn't read your mind.
What do I mean by that?
Let's say you're going
to use dispatch async,
and you're using it from within one
of the methods in one of your classes.
And you pass an instance
variable in that block,
and you tell it to do something.
Well, what's actually happening here?
Well, implicitly, this is the way the
compiler thinks about it,
is that's actually taking the
self pointer and dereferencing
it and getting at the Ivar.
And therefore,
from the compiler's perspective,
self is actually the variable
that's captured in the block,
and self is automatically retained.
This might surprise you.
Why is my object living this long?
Well, it's because the object that
you thought was being captured
isn't the one you thought.
There's a mismatch.
So what can you do?
Real simple workaround.
Just be explicit.
Create a temporary variable,
assign the instance variable,
capture the temporary variable.
Now you're explicit.
Only the Ivar is captured,
and only the Ivar lives long
enough to do the right thing.
Another side effect of this,
of capturing self,
is if the Ivar changes between the
dispatch async and when the block starts,
you may get a different value
for that Ivar being used,
and that might surprise you.
So this is another good reason.
To be really explicit,
say I want this one right here,
and the same one when
the block actually runs.
Let's talk about another example
about what block copy doesn't do.
It doesn't automatically
fix retain cycles.
Now, luckily,
a lot of our frameworks have
been designed over the years
to avoid retain cycles,
but it's still always possible with new
code to introduce new retain cycles.
Here's a really simple example.
It's also really obvious in
isolation that what is going on here.
We're going to take an object,
we're going to set some kind of handler,
and guess what?
We want to use that object in the block.
Well, what's going on here?
The object is going to
block copy the block,
and that block is automatically
going to retain the captured objects.
And here we go, a simple cycle.
Well, what can we do about this?
Well, a simple workaround is that
in manual memory management,
under-under block variables are
left to the programmer to decide
the policies about how they work.
And under-under block variables are not
implicitly retained at block copy time.
The value is, but the object itself is
not implicitly retained.
So you can take advantage of
this fact to assign the object
to a temporary block variable to
prevent automatic retaining of it.
And guess what?
The object now just retains the block.
The block just holds its hands off
the under-under block variable,
and the right thing happens.
and Kevin's work on
dispatch sync deadlocking.
As Kevin was illustrating earlier
with dispatch sync deadlocking,
it may be obvious in isolation,
but with a nontrivial code,
this pattern can end up in
practice in nonobvious ways.
Retaining nonobjects.
This is what Kevin was
talking about with queues.
: GCD queues are an
example of a non-object,
and so are CF objects.
So what do we do?
Well, we just need to retain, use it,
release it after we're done
with it asynchronously.
Pretty simple.
Here we are with the CF example.
Make sure to CF retain,
then we maybe do something
awesome with that foo thing,
and then we can CF release it when
we're done asynchronously using it.
Well, what else does block copy not
do that you need to be aware of?
It's not implicitly called by non-blocks.
Remember how I said that
blocks can capture blocks
and the right thing happens?
Well, let's say you're building an array
on the stack and you're trying to do
something clever by creating custom
blocks and putting them into an array.
We actually saw examples of this
when we first started designing
blocks and people were trying to
experiment with design patterns.
Well, guess what?
This block is only valid for the
scope of the enclosing for loop.
Once that for loop exits,
that block is invalid anymore.
So that entire array becomes invalid.
The workaround for this is to use
block copy inside the for loop.
Similarly,
functions themselves are not blocks.
They don't automatically
manage the memory of blocks.
Therefore,
if you're trying to do something clever,
and actually, it's not
fairly reasonable and
just return a block,
that won't work.
You need to call block copy in
manual memory management mode.
And then, of course, if you block copy,
your caller needs to be aware
in this last case that it
needs to block release it.
So keep that in mind.
So let's talk about better blocks.
Let's talk about automatic
reference counting,
which is one of the big themes
of this week's conference.
Many of the challenges outlined about
block copy and what it does not do are
fixed with automatic reference counting.
I strongly hope you can
check out this feature,
but we won't be talking about it here.
Also, some of the things are not fixed.
You still need to be aware of these
facts that you've learned today.
Non-objects are not automatically
retained and released.
You still need to do dispatch retain
and release or CF retain and release.
See the ARC talks for more info.
So to conclude,
blocks and Grand Central Dispatch are
a very important part of the design
patterns we use at Apple for both
encapsulating enumeration and concurrent
for loops to asynchronous callbacks.
They're simpler.
They're safer.
They help you avoid boilerplate code.
There are already patterns
that you use today.
For more information,
I'd like to suggest that you
contact Michael Jurowicz,
our developer tools and
performance evangelist.
Paul Danbold, our Core OS evangelist.
We have documentation.
GCD is open source if
you want to check it out.
Here are the related sessions.
We have the developer tools kickoff,
the introducing ARC session,
mastering GCD,
Objective-C advanced on Friday,
and mastering GCDs tomorrow.
Thanks for coming.